---
title: My Thoughts on Game Design and Favorite Games
layout: musings
categories: musings
tags: game games
---

A list of my favorite video games as of 2019 and some of my thoughts on game design.

<!--more-->

Video games have been an important part of my life since I knew how to use a computer.
As I've gotten older I've played more and more games I've become more critical of game because I believe the medium has more potential than mere escapist fantasies.


**My Philosophy on Game Design and the Future of Video Games**


At first I enjoyed video games solely for the escapist fantasies they may offer.
However, as I've gotten older and played more and more games I began to consider games in other ways which aren't solely escapist entertainment. While I do concede that there do exist many games, particularly AAA titles with large financial backing behind them and stakeholders to appease, rely on tried and true formulaic ways of creating games that emphasize fancy graphics and mechanics designed for mass-appeal instead of attempting to push the envelope for the video game medium.

I think the medium of video games is a very interesting design space to explore due to the interactivity inherent in it. Most forms of art, such as a painting or a film, are consumed passively without any consumer input changing the output. However, that being said I am not happy with the way the current game industry is going. I've noticed some modern AAA titles are designed in ways that cause the game to be consumed in a somewhat passive manner, with simplistic game play and heavily scripted sequences where the player is essentially a rat in an over-engineered maze. The biggest series that comes to my mind when I think this is the Uncharted series of games, that are more or less movies with some minor interactive elements. Instead of trying to emulate other mediums of art, I desire for game design to really leverage on the interactive aspects of the experience to really produce an unprecedented experience not previously attainable through other means.

I'm personally interested in the 'simulation' aspect of video game design and how that can be expanded upon to produce novel experiences. What I mean by a 'simulation' is a game that is designed to emphasize player choice, with a myriad of universal systems in place which respond to the player's actions in consistent ways that make logical sense within the context of the game world. Some popular titles that fall under this category of games include Sim City, Deus Ex, Fallout, and the Sims. A much better description of these kinds of kinds of games can be found on the genre's associated [Wikipedia page.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immersive_sim) I like these kinds of games because they truly challenge the player to come up with their own solutions to problems instead of the player trying to figure out the developers *intended* solution to a problem and allow the player to think creatively about how to leverage game systems to achieve their goals. Games which simulate a coherent and consistent game world have inspired me to consider what these games would be like if taken to their logical conclusion. I imagine with time games will have systems so complex that will mirror the natural and artificial systems we interact with in our daily lives and allow for true immersion.

That being said however, doesn't mean I am not a fan of games that don't follow this design ethos. I believe there is a lot of merit to well-polished, linear experiences escapist fantasies if the designer wants to craft a specific kind of experience. However, I generally tend to respect and appreciate games more that trust the player with making their own choices.

**My Top 10 Favorite Games of All Time (As of 2019)**

1. **World of Warcraft** -- This game had me hooked as soon as I saw South Park's 'Make Love Not Warcraft' episode in 2006 when I was 9. I thought the concept of creating your own character and exploring a massively multi-player fantasy world filled to the brim with like minded nerds was tantalizing. This game was one of my primary childhood past-times and in this world I made many friends, adventured through a massive fantasy world with an ocean of lore associated with it, and had a blast in the meantime. The game itself is a flawed masterpiece; the game wasn't perfect from the start and still has a very antiquated way of handling combat through hotkeys but I believe the experience of World of Warcraft is defined by the sum of its parts. I was an active player from 2006-2014, and stopped when I went into university. I've still come back from time to time, but I can't commit to it the same way I used to and I don't like the current state of the game and player base. Overall the experience of playing during the 'golden age' of World of Warcraft and the people I met along the way played an important role in my early development that helped shape me into who I am today.

2. **Garry's Mod** -- This game is another game I spent a lot of my early years on. I was first exposed to Garry's Mod through the silly YouTube videos that people would create in the game and was fascinated with the sandbox nature of the game where the game was designed from the ground up to be a platform for players to express themselves and to further mod the game to create all sorts of new and interesting ways of playing. Many aspects of the game helped stimulate my interest in technology and mechanics: the game itself was a physics sandbox which had much functionality for building and making basic physical contraptions, however what caught my attention in particular the 'WireMod' addon which added a whole set of functionality including sensors, logic gates, and input devices in a way that mirrored the way actual computers worked. In fact, it even had its own Lua-like programming language called Expression 2 which helped me learn programming! The game itself captured my imagination and really made me excited to learn these basic electronics concepts and I really believe this game could be a great tool to any other younger person who has an interest in that sort of stuff to learn and experiment with physics and electronics. This is all not to say that the other aspects of the game, such as custom games made by the community, weren't fun as well, they were icing on the whole cake that is Garry's Mod and allows for near infinite re-playability so long as there's a community behind it.

3. **Team Fortress 2** -- This game I feel is in a league of its own and I think it's one of the best titles my favorite game developer Valve had produced. I had always been a fan of the first person shooter genre, both of the more hectic and arcadey Quake-style gameplay and the slower, realistic gunplay of Rainbow 6 Siege. Team Fortress 2 is a game that really distinguished itself from its competition through it's class-based team-oriented gameplay, the fantastic art design, the virtual economy of the game, and the very endearing personas valve created for each one of their merry band of mercenaries. I consider the game itself a social experience in and of itself, the gameplay encourages teams to coordinate with each other and the various facets of character customization through cosmetic items for your mercenaries allow for player expression which allows each player to stand out individually from the crowd. In fact, the cosmetic items themselves lend to an entire other facet to the game: the in-game cosmetic market. Players have the ability to trade their items that they gained through gameplay with each other and soon large trading communities formed around the game's cosmetic market which I found myself engrossed in too. These early experiences made a huge impression on me by kindling an interest in learning about economics and negotiation in a safe virtual space where I could apply these skills as I learned them.

4. **Arma 2/DayZ Mod** -- I prefer to lump these two together because the DayZ for Arma 2 got me into the larger community for Arma. Arma 2 itself is a military simulator that aims to provide a (mostly) accurate depiction of the tactics and hardware employed by modern day militaries, including aspects such as realistic weapon ballistics and a whole catalog of real-life military vehicles. Arma 2 is what I consider to be a great simulation, since it put a lot of development time into creating robust game systems and trusted the players to use them as they saw fit by including a map-editor which the users can create their own custom scenarios and even custom games with. DayZ mod is one of those custom games. DayZ is a massively multiplayer zombie survival game, where the players were dropped into a hostile world with only a backpack and a few bandages and had to loot their own weapons and goods needed for survival from the abandoned structures dotted around the map. The zombies, however, aren't the main enemy of this game; instead it is the other human players which are the biggest threat to one's survival. The only rule the game had was that there were no rules, and everyone was free game if a player determined that they wanted to play as a bandit and earn their items through murdering other players. Death is in the air and can swoop in at any time from the tree-line, and the pure anarchy coupled with everyone having lethal firearms leads to tenuous alliances between survivors and adrenaline filled firefights that you have no idea how you got out unscathed.

5. **Deus Ex** -- This game is a true example immersive-simulation style gameplay that explores heady, highbrow themes such as humanity's ability to govern itself and the nature of human bio-mechanical augmentations. Deus Ex is considered by many to be a perfect game, which I agree with to an extent. The game itself is structured with a linear, globe-trotting plot that sees the protagonist JC Denton going around the world to uncover conspiracy theories of a near future. This game trusts the player to make their own decisions and allows for pure player expression to tackle problems in however they see fit, and employs an RPG system of skills to help shape and define how the player goes about the game. However, the joy of the game to me comes from the sum of all of its parts. This game likes to delve deep into its themes and explores a world that's not too far off from our own: where global conflict and politics has shifted from large-scale war to isolated terror-cells operating in the shadows. This game is not afraid to flaunt its themes, with average civilians walking around the street reciting political philosophers and talking about global politics. Not to mention, the retro synthesizer-heavy soundtrack for this game is fantastic and helps set the tone of the experience. I believe this game is really a product of its' time with a lot of motifs and ideas being taken from other media of the late 90's/early 2000's, most notably the way the way the protagonist looks straight out of The Matrix. Overall, this game scratches a particular itch of mine that really makes me excited for the way in which games like these can be expanded upon with future technology.

6. **System Shock 2** -- This game comes from a similar design lineage of Deus Ex which trusts the player to make their own decisions about how they are going to go about progressing through the game. What this game captures very well is the atmosphere of being isolated in deep space in the claustrophobic metal corridors of a spaceship, a feeling similar evoked by the movie Alien. The survival of the player depends on their ability to scavenge and manage their resources against an overwhelming force which wants nothing but to see you perish; enemies will emerge out of every corridor and nowhere is truly safe. It's a very fast-paced, adrenaline fueled experience that kept me on my toes the whole time. The method of storytelling popularized by the 'Shock' series of games is fantastic too. Since the game takes place after waking up from cryogenic sleep on a derelict spaceship taken over by an unknown alien organism, all of the story and lore is absorbed through various audio logs which the former crew members had left detailing everything from their daily activities before the aliens shows up to the last moments of panicked survivors. The ship is also designed to be less of a level of a video game and more like an actual spaceship which people actually inhabited and worked in which helped with the immersion factor. This game to me is a great piece of survival horror with some great cyberpunk aesthetics and motifs which really made an impact on me.

7. **Stalker: Call of Pripyat** -- A game focused around a hypothetical world where the Chernobyl Nuclear Fallout incident created a zone of extraordinary artifacts with supernatural powers unknown by science. With aesthetics taken straight out of Andrei Tarkovsky's 'Stalker' the game develops on this concept of the 'the zone' as a place of mystery which draws many individuals of different walks of life, collectively known as 'Stalkers' seeking different things from the zone: from outlaws seeking riches or refuge from the law to scientists seeking to study and understanding the zone to benefit humanity. The world in which this game paints is brutal, unforgiving, and grim but has a charm all of its own. This game in particular sees the protagonist being a Military Officer who is inserted into the zone to uncover the mystery of what happened to a wing of helicopters that inexplicably crashed in the zone and the player must navigate the open-world of the zone at their own accord to accomplish their objective while avoiding its hazards. While I am a fan of the post-apocalyptic soviet-bloc aesthetics, the gameplay systems which control the artificial intelligence of the non-player characters piques my interest. Throughout the world there are roving gangs of AI Stalkers with different alignments which move throughout the world with their own objectives which could occasionally clash with the player or even each other in novel and interesting ways. This complex web of AI actors going about the world really makes the zone feel alive, and dangerous depending on who the player comes across. This game also has a strong modding community that extend the base game in all sorts of ways through mods, with my favorite being Misery Mod which reworks the game to be an even more brutal and realistic survival experience. There are two other Stalker games that have also played and I'm a huge fan of the series, but Stalker Call of Pripyat is the one that stuck out to me the most.

8. **Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater** -- Oh boy do I love the Metal Gear Solid series. This inclusion in my list of favorite games may be contradictory to what I said before of games should not be trying to emulate film, since the Metal Gear Solid series is notorious for its extensive use of cut-scenes and cinematic set pieces. However, the game itself is a solid and complex game of its own accord, having a lot of nuance to the gameplay elements and challenges the player to come up with creative ways of using their limited item set to sneak past guards and accomplish Snake's objectives. Like many other games in this series, the director Hideo Kojima is a perfectionist who puts a lot of love into subverting player expectations and putting a lot of detail into his games as well as trying to make some kind of novel artistic spin on all of his games. From start to finish, this game had me hooked and inspired me to play all of the other main games in the Metal Gear franchise.

9. **Katamari Damacy** -- I'm a cynical gamer, after having seen and played a lot of games I began to lose that child-like enchantment that had drawn me to video games in the first place. Katamari Damacy however is not like other games, it is a true anomoly. This game from the second I started playing filled me with the same childlike glee I had felt in year's past, and reminded me of the true fun that games can have. The premise is odd: the game revolves around the player rolling a Katamari, which is essentially a ball which makes objects of a similar size 'stick' to it to roll them up in a ball. At first it starts at a meager size, picking up everyday items such as coins and matchboxes, but progressively picking up larger and larger objects as it grows bigger eventually rolling up people and even entire cities. The sense of scale the player experiences as they grows their Katamari is fantastic, and with the whole experience backed up by a catchy and gleeful J-Pop soundtrack contributes to an amazingly fun, surreal, and happy experience despite its simple premise (and the seemingly apocalyptic event that the player appears to be taking part in committing). In fact, the game is [recognized by the Museam of Modern Art for its game design.](https://www.moma.org/collection/works/164919) This game spawned its own franchise of sequels, which all add in unique ways to the simple pleasure of rolling objects up with a Katamari. I will always hold this game and its sequels near and dear to my heart.

10. **Fallout New Vegas** -- I've always been a fan of the Fallout series ever since I started with Fallout 3. However, the game in the series which I feel emulates the definitive 'Fallout' experience of crafting a character to role play with in a post-apocalyptic world is certainly Fallout New Vegas. Taking place in the American southwest, the player explores the remnants of society following a large-scale nuclear war that devastated humanity. The game world has many nooks and cranny to explore and a lot of stories of its inhabitants to uncover, with a distinctly 'Fallout' sense of dark humor steeped in American pop-culture to flavor the whole experience and paints a morally gray world where the line between good and evil isn't clear. There is a lot to love in Fallout New Vegas and I'd recommend anyone to try it.

**Honorary Mention: Dwarf Fortress** -- This game to me is the pinnacle of 'simulation' games. I have never truly been able to get a firm handle on the complexity this game has to offer due to how obtuse the interface is but I can at the very least appreciate it for the true achievement it is. The premise of the game is to build a viable dwarf settlement from scratch, commanding a population of Dwarves from an overhead perspective to perform various tasks to accomplish various daily activities. The player doesn't necessarily control each dwarf individually, instead giving them objectives for the dwarfs to collectively complete. This game deliberately forgos putting development into a fleshed out interface to focus more on the various systems that take place within the game world that control every facet of this game such as the way animals behave to the way in which characters will fight each other blow-by-blow attributing to a complex fantasy world all rendered in ASCII text. This game also epitomizes procedurally-generated gameplay: with everything from the terrain to each dwarf's individual personalities and history being generated on the fly. Many stories can be found online of the unique and/or absurd interactions that take place within the game worlds of various Dwarf Fortress players. This game is truly an achievement that was born out of a passion project by its' two-man development team: brothers Tarn and Zach Adams. It's hard for me to really articulate the scope and technical achievement of this project, but to give you an idea of its' influence this game is [also recognized by the Museum of Modern art for its design.](https://www.moma.org/collection/works/164920)
