---
title: Making this Website, Part 3 - Server Migration
layout: projects
categories: projects
---

Another update on this website since [last update.](/projects/2019/3/5/website_pt3.md) The most notable thing that happened was me migrating my server from being hosted on my home network onto a dedicated virtual private server.

<!--more-->

Self hosting has always been my go-to for whenever I needed to host any server since it's more or less free save for the marginal power costs. However, since I was hosting from my college apartment that doesn't have a static IP I was tired of having to change where my domain name pointed at every few months. Plus, I'd like to ensure as much uptime as possible for my server, and since my ISP tends to have outages at least once a month hosting on this connection might not be the wisest idea.

I decided to get a dedicated VPS for hosting this website since it would solve most of my problems and it means I wouldn't have to share website bandwidth with my home network; since I'd like this website to be a platform that I can build or host other services off of it helps to keep my options open in case I'd like to implement something that I wouldn't want hogging up bandwidth on my home network.

Since this website is more or less a static HTML pages generated by Jekyll, there's not much back end processing that has to go on. I used the blog [lowendbox.com](https://lowendbox.com/) to find a minimal and cheap VPS that would fit the bill without costing much. For all intents and purposes, I don't expect this site to use too much resources or get enough traffic to justify the cost of paying for anything more than half a gigabyte of ram and 15 gigabytes of SSD storage.

Since I deploy my website using Github and Jekyll, host migration was a breeze. All I had to do was install Git, Rsync, and Jekyll and simply run my update script to pull the repository from Github and build it locally. In case I ever require a more powerful VPS instance, I can easily migrate it again.


Besides that, most changes I've been making now and mostly minor tweaks, such as adjusting CSS properties to my liking, fixing minor bugs, and adding little touches like the Favicon. I've also been experimenting with ways I can streamline my work-flow by scripting most of the mundane stuff, such as learning how to send remote commands to the VPS to run the update script whenever I push to the Github repository. It's good practice since I'm constantly finding new ways to apply myself.

I truly find it fun slowly growing this site, I find it amazing how much the whole endeavor of designing and implementation has evolved since its inception and how much I've learned along the way. I still plan on continuing maintaining this as an ongoing project and web presence for myself among other things since working on it and gradually adding to it has been a somewhat therapeutic process as well as a productive hobby.
